Carl’s Logo or landing page Gif

In order to gain an understanding, we have described the individual scientific principles and naturally occurring phenomenon’s in simplified terms that all work together to become the CHE.

Click on the links below to navigate to each topic of interest.

(make all topic titles below into page links)

1.	Heat transfer principles 
2.	What is a heat exchanger (Hx)
3.	Thermosyphon
4.	Lapse rate of air (Pressure temperature relationship of a gas)
5.	Dew point of moisture in air
6.	Convection
7.	Geothermal heat
8.	Power generation
9.	Terra forming a desert
10.	Sustainable environmentally friendly human habitation

All the text below is under construction. Please feel free to comment edit or add information as required.

# 1.	Heat transfer principles

All matter on Earth contains heat, and when two bodies are at different temperatures, heat will migrate or transfer from the warmer body into the cooler body. Heat transfer will continue to occur until both bodies are the same temperature.

There are three methods of heat transfer: Conduction, Convection and Radiation.
•	Conduction: heat transfer by direct contact between two items.
•	Convection: heat transfer by currents flowing in a gas or liquid.
•	Radiation: heat transfer through an empty space by infrared radiation to a solid object.

Put conduction, convection, radiation diagrams here

Heat transfer follows a few basic rules.
•	Heat always moves from a warmer body into a cooler one and never in the opposite direction. 
•	Heat will move from one body into another as long as there is a temperature difference between the two. Known as heat exchange. 
•	When there are large temperature differences between two bodies, heat transfer will occur at a rapid rate and slow down as the temperature difference reduces.
Possibly another heat transfer diagrams here – something well known globally?

# 2. What is a heat exchanger

A heat exchanger is a device that has been designed to aid in efficient heat transfer from a warm heat source into a cooler substance. 
Heat exchangers come in a variety of designs but are generally constructed from materials that have a high specific heat capacity and are therefore able to absorb and release heat easily. 
Example: In a water to air heat exchanger, if we had a copper tube with hot water (60 Dec C) running through it and passed room temperature air (21 Deg C) over outside of the copper tube then heat transfer will occur due to the temperature difference between the two bodies. The hot water contained within the tube will release some of its heat into the copper tube that is in contact with the room temperature air and that heat will transfer into the air surrounding the copper tube. This process will continue until temperature equilibrium is achieved.
Put example of a common heat exchanger used globally here

# 3. Thermosyphon

Thermosyphon is a method of passive heat exchange, based on natural convection, which circulates a fluid without the necessity of a mechanical pump.
When a body or container of water is heated the warmer molecules will rise to the top of the container like in a hot water cylinder (the hottest water is at the top of the cylinder and the coolest is at the bottom). Then as the water at the top cools it starts to sink back to the bottom. 
(insert gif here)
Example:  In a solar hot water system this action can be used to collect heat from the sun to make hot water which can be stored for later use. As long as the storage is located above the solar collector, heat generated by the solar collector will be transferred into the water which will then begin to rise up into the storage cylinder and cooler water in the cylinder will sink down into the collector to be heated. This is called the thermosyphon effect which is a naturally occurring effect and requires no pumps for the water to move. This phenomenon will continue to happen until the heat source (the sun) goes down. 
Example:  Water at the bottom of the ocean is colder than water at the surface of the ocean.

# 4. Lapse rate of air (Pressure temperature relationship of a gas)

All gasses have a direct pressure temperature relationship, including air. Air gets cooler the higher in the atmosphere you go above sea level. As you climb a mountain, the air temperature will decrease by 6.5 degrees C for every 1000 meters you climb. This is called the lapse rate and is a result of air pressure reducing with altitude.
Note: Water temperature is not affected by pressure. 

# 5. Dew point of moisture in air

Air is capable of carrying moisture or water which is called humidity. The humidity contained in air is in the form of vapour as is expressed as a percentage of the amount of moisture present in the air compared to if it was 100% saturated. This is called relative humidity.
On our planet, we have environments that seem extremely dry like in a desert but the air in a desert still has a moisture or relative humidity content. 
If the air containing moisture is subjected to the ideal conditions, that is becomes cool enough, the moisture in it will start to condense into small droplets and may be visible from the ground as clouds. If the air temperature continues to get colder the water vapour will become more concentrated and it will eventually begin to rain. This happens when the water vapour droplets become too heavy to remain suspended and gravity pulls them towards the earth’s surface.
(insert gif here)

# 6. Convection

Convection currents in a fluid (both water and air) happen as a result of heat energy being transferred into molecules causing them to become less dense than the molecules around them. The “lighter” molecules will rise above the denser molecules as the denser molecules put pressure on the lighter molecules forcing them to rise above the denser molecules.  
As warmer molecules that have risen give up their heat into the surrounding molecules and cool down, they will become denser and will sink back down below the warmer molecules.

# 7. Geothermal heat

Geothermal heat is heat that is sourced from the earth. The subterranean temperature of the earth is at a constant temperature which increases with depth. 

# 8. Power generation

# 9. Terra forming a desert

# 10. Sustainable environmentally friendly human habitation

Now here comes the really interesting part, if we combine these simple natural processes (thermosyphon in water and the air pressure-temperature relationship) in a controlled way, we can cause moisture from the atmosphere (air) to form into water droplets (rain) which can be collected and used in an otherwise arid area (a desert) to grow trees and crops (carbon capture or removal from the atmosphere), farm animals and support human life. 
